Update falcon model card (#37184)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/model_doc/falcon.md

> Click on the Falcon models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply Falcon to different language tasks.

The example below demonstrates how to generate text with [`Pipeline`], [`AutoModel`], and from the command line.

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="Pipeline">

```py
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

pipeline = pipeline(
    task="text-generation", 
    model="tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device=0
)
pipeline(
    "Write a short poem about coding",
    max_length=100,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.7
)
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AutoModel">

```py
import torch
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
    attn_implementation="sdpa",
)

input_ids = tokenizer("Write a short poem about coding", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")

output = model.generate(**input_ids)
print(tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="transformers-cli">

```bash

> transformers-cli chat --model_name_or_path tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct --torch_dtype auto --attn_implementation flash_attention_2 --device 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# pip install -U flash-attn --no-build-isolation
transformers-cli chat --model_name_or_path tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct --torch_dtype auto --attn_implementation flash_attention_2 --device 0
```

```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

Quantization reduces the memory burden of large models by representing the weights in a lower precision. Refer to the [Quantization](../quantization/overview) overview for more available quantization backends.

The example below uses [bitsandbytes](../quantization/bitsandbytes) to only quantize the weights to 4-bits.

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, BitsAndBytesConfig

quantization_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
    load_in_4bit=True,
    bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4",
    bnb_4bit_use_double_quant=True,
)

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("tiiuae/falcon-7b")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "tiiuae/falcon-7b",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
)

inputs = tokenizer("In quantum physics, entanglement means", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
outputs = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=100)
print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

## Notes

> - If you're upgrading from an older custom code checkpoint, remember to convert it to the official Transformers format for better stability and performance using the conversion script located in the [Falcon model directory](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/src/transformers/models/falcon). To use this script, simply call it with `python convert_custom_code_checkpoint.py --checkpoint_dir my_model`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you're upgrading from an older custom code checkpoint, remember to convert it to the official Transformers format for better stability and performance using the conversion script located in the [Falcon model directory](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/src/transformers/models/falcon).

   ```bash
   python convert_custom_code_checkpoint.py --checkpoint_dir my_model
   ```

```

-->

<div style="float: right;">
    <div class="flex flex-wrap space-x-1">
        <img alt="PyTorch" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white">
        <img alt="FlashAttention" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/%E2%9A%A1%EF%B8%8E%20FlashAttention-eae0c8?style=flat">
        <img alt="SDPA" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/SDPA-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white">
    </div>
</div>

# Falcon

> Falcon is a series of causal decoder-only language models developed by the [Technology Innovation Institute (TII)](https://www.tii.ae/). Falcon models utilize multi-query attention and are optimized for efficient inference while maintaining strong performance. The models were trained on large-scale datasets (1+ trillion tokens) with a focus on the high-quality [RefinedWeb](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116) corpus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Falcon](https://huggingface.co/papers/2311.16867) is a family of large language models, available in 7B, 40B, and 180B parameters, as pretrained and instruction tuned variants. This model focuses on scaling pretraining over three categories, performance, data, and hardware. Falcon uses multigroup attention to significantly reduce inference memory requirements and rotary positional embeddings (RoPE). These models are pretrained on [RefinedWeb](https://huggingface.co/datasets/tiiuae/falcon-refinedweb), a high-quality and deduplicated 5T token dataset.
```

> You can find the research paper at https://huggingface.co/papers/2311.16867 and check out the official checkpoints under the [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/collections/tiiuae/falcon-64fb432660017eeec9837b5a) collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find all the original Falcon checkpoints under the [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/collections/tiiuae/falcon-64fb432660017eeec9837b5a) collection.
```

> [!TIP]

> > Click on the Falcon models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to use Falcon for various NLP tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Click on the Falcon models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply Falcon to different language tasks.
```

> The examples below demonstrate how to use Falcon with [`Pipeline`], [`AutoModel`], and from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below demonstrates how to generate text with [`Pipeline`], [`AutoModel`], and from the command line.
```

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="Pipeline">

```py

> from transformers import pipeline

Reviewer: Can do this:

```py
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

pipeline = pipeline(
    task="text-generation", 
    model="tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device=0
)
pipeline(
    "Write a short poem about coding",
    max_length=100,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.7
)
```

Author: Added!

# For text generation with Falcon-7B-Instruct
generator = pipeline(
    "text-generation", 
    model="tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct",
    device_map="auto"
)
response = generator(
    "Write a short poem about coding",
    max_length=100,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.7
)
print(response[0]["generated_text"])
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AutoModel">

```py

> from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM

Reviewer: Simplify to this:

```py
import torch
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
    attn_implementation="sdpa",
)

input_ids = tokenizer("Write a short poem about coding", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")

output = model.generate(**input_ids)
print(tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

import torch

# Load tokenizer and model
model_id = "tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,  # Load in bfloat16 for faster inference
    device_map="auto",  # Automatically determine device mapping
    attn_implementation="sdpa", # Use scaled dot product attention
)

# Prepare input
text = "Write a function in Python to calculate the Fibonacci sequence:"
inputs = tokenizer(text, return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)

# Generate
with torch.no_grad():
    output = model.generate(
        inputs["input_ids"],
        max_new_tokens=512,
        temperature=0.7,
        do_sample=True,
    )

# Decode and print result
generated_text = tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True)
print(generated_text)
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="transformers-cli">

```bash

> transformers-cli chat --model_name_or_path tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct

Reviewer: ```bash
transformers-cli chat --model_name_or_path tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct --torch_dtype auto --attn_implementation flash_attention_2 --device 0
```

```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

> ## Quantization for Efficient Inference
> 
> For lower memory usage, you can load Falcon with 4-bit quantization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quantization reduces the memory burden of large models by representing the weights in a lower precision. Refer to the [Quantization]../quantization/overview) overview for more available quantization backends.

The example below uses [bitsandbytes](../quantization/bitsandbytes) to only quantize the weights to 4-bits.
```

```python

> # Make sure to have bitsandbytes available in the environment
> from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, BitsAndBytesConfig
> import torch
> 
> # Configure 4-bit quantization
> quantization_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
>     load_in_4bit=True,
>     bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
>     bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4",
>     bnb_4bit_use_double_quant=True,
> )
> 
> # Load tokenizer and model with quantization
> model_id = "tiiuae/falcon-7b"
> tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)
> model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
>     model_id,
>     device_map="auto",
>     quantization_config=quantization_config,
> )
> 
> # Generate text with the quantized model
> inputs = tokenizer("In quantum physics, entanglement means", return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)
> outputs = model.generate(inputs["input_ids"], max_new_tokens=100)
> print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0], skip_special_tokens=True))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import torch
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, BitsAndBytesConfig

quantization_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
    load_in_4bit=True,
    bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4",
    bnb_4bit_use_double_quant=True,
)

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("tiiuae/falcon-7b")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "tiiuae/falcon-7b",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
)

inputs = tokenizer("In quantum physics, entanglement means", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
outputs = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=100)
print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

```

## Notes

> - Falcon models come in different sizes (7B, 40B, 180B parameters) and variants (base and instruct).
> - The "instruct" versions have been fine-tuned on instruction data and are better for conversational or instruction-following tasks.
> - For most applications, using FlashAttention or SDPA optimization is recommended for the best performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - If you're upgrading from an older custom code checkpoint, remember to convert it to the official Transformers format using the conversion script located in the

Reviewer: Add snippet under here for using the script

```suggestion
- If you're upgrading from an older custom code checkpoint, remember to convert it to the official Transformers format for better stability and performance using the conversion script located in the
```

> [Falcon model directory](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/src/transformers/models/falcon) to benefit from improved stability and performance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Falcon model directory](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/src/transformers/models/falcon). 
```
